In this video, we'll apply the divide and
conquer algorithm design paradigm to
the problem of multiplying matrices.
This will culminate in the study of
Strassen matrix multiplication algorithm.
And this is a super cool algorithm for
two reasons.
First of all, Strassen's algorithm
is completely non-trivial.
It's totally non-obvious, very clever,
not at all clear how Strassen
ever came up with it.
The second cool feature is it's for
such a fundamental problem.
So computers as long as they've
been in use from the time they
were invented up til today a lot of their
cycles is spent multiplying matrices.
It just comes up all the time
in important applications.
So let me first just make sure we're
all clear on what the problem is of
multiplying two matrices.
So we're going to be interested
in three matrices x, y and z.
I'm going to assume they all
have the same dimensions, n x n.
The ideas we'll talk about
are also relevant for
multiplying non square matrices but we're
not going to discuss it in this video.
The entries in these matrices, you
could think of it as whatever you want.
Maybe they're integers,
maybe they're rationals.
Maybe they're from some finite field.
It depends on the application but
the point is they're entries
that we can add and multiply.
So how is it that you take two
n x n matrices x and y and
multiply them producing
a new n x n matrix z?
Well recall that the ij entry of z, that
means the entry in the ith row and the jth
column, is simply the dot product of
the ith row of x with the jth column of y.
So if ij was this red square,
this red entry over in the z matrix that
would be derived from the corresponding
row of the x matrix and
the corresponding column of the y matrix.
And recall what I mean by dot product,
that just means you take the products of
the individual components and
then add up the results.
So ultimately the zij entry boils
down to a sum over n things
where each of the constituent
products is just the xik entry,
the ik entry of the matrix x
with a kj entry of the matrix y.
Where your k is ranging from 1 to n.
So that's how zij is defined for
a given pair of indices i and j.
One thing to note is that where we
often use n to denote the input size,
here we're using n to denote
the dimension of each of these matrices.
The input size is not n, the input
size is quite a bit bigger than n.
Specifically, each of these are n x n
matrices that contains n squared entries.
So since presumably we have to read
the input, which has size n squared, and
we have to produce the output,
which also has size n squared.
The best we could really hope for
a matrix multiplication algorithm would be
a running time of n squared, so the
question is how close can we get to it.
Before we talk about algorithms for matrix
multiplication let me just make sure we're
all crystal clear on exactly what the
problem is so let's just actually spell
out what would be the result of
multiplying two different 2 x 2 matrices.
So we can parameterize two generic 2 x
2 matrices by just giving the first one
entries a, b, c, and d.
Or these four entries
could all be anything.
And then, we're multiplying
by a second 2 x 2 matrix.
Let's call its entries e, f, g, and h.
Now what's the result
of multiplying these?
Where again, it's going to be a 2 x
2 matrix where each entry is just
the corresponding dot product of
the relevant row of the first matrix and
column of the second matrix.
So to get the upper left entry we take the
dot product of the upper row of the first
matrix and the first column of the left
column of the second matrix so
that results in ae + bg.
To get the upper right entry we take
the dot product of the top row of
the left matrix with the right
column of the second matrix, so
that gives us af + bh and then filling
in the other entries in the same way,
we get ce + dg and cf + dh.
Okay, so
that's multiplying two matrices, and
we've already discussed
the definition in general.
Now, suppose you had to write a program
to actually compute the result of
multiplying two n x n matrices.
One natural way to do that would
just be to return to the definition,
which defines each of the n squared
entries in the z matrix as a suitable sum
of products of entries of the x and
y matrices.
So in the next quiz I'd like you to figure
out exactly what would be the running time
of that algorithm as a function
of the matrix dimension n.
Where, as usual, we count the additional
multiplication of two individual entries
as a constant time operation.
So the correct response to
this quiz is the third answer.
That the running time of
the straightforward iterative algorithm
runs in cubic time relative
to the matrix dimension n.
To see this just recall what
the definition of the matrix
multiplication was.
The definition tells us
that each entry zij of
the output matrix z is defined as the sum
from k = 1 to n of xik times ykj.
That is the dot product of
the ith row of the x matrix and
the jth column of the y matrix.
I'm certainly assuming that we
have the matrices represented
in a way that we could access
a given entry in a constant time.
And under that assumption remember each of
these products only takes constant time.
And so then to compute zij we just
have to add up these n products so
that's going to be theta of n
time to compute a given zij and
then there's an n squared
entries that we have to compute.
There's n choices for i, n choices for j.
So that gives us n squared times n or
cubic running time overall.
For the natural algorithm, which is really
just a triple for loop which computes
each entry of the output array
separately using the dot product.
So the question as always for the keen
algorithm designer is, can we do better.
Can we beat n cube time for
multiplying two matrices.
And we might be especially emboldened with
the progress that we've already seen in
terms of multiplying two integers.
We apply the divide and
conquer algorithm to the problem
of multiplying two integers.
And we had both a naive
recursive algorithm and
a seemingly better algorithm due to Gauss,
which made only three recursive calls.
Now we haven't yet analyzed
the running time of that algorithm.
But as we'll see later,
that does indeed beat
the quadratic running time of
the grade school algorithm.
So it's very natural to ask,
can we do exactly the same thing here?
There's the obvious n cubed algorithm
which follows straight from
the definition, perhaps analogous to Gauss
we could have some clever divide and
conquer method which beats cubic time.
So that's what we're
going to explore next.
Let's recall the divide and conquer
paradigm, what does it mean to use it?
Well we first have to identify
smaller subproblems, so
if we want to multiple two n x n matrices.
We have to identify multiplications
of smaller matrices that we can solve
recursively.
Once we figured out how we want to divide
the given problem into smaller ones.
Then the conquer step, we simply
invoke our own algorithm recursively.
That's going to recursively multiply
the smaller matrices together.
And then in general, we'll have to combine
the results of the recursive cause to
get the solution for the original problem.
In our case, to get the product
of the original two matrices
from the product of whatever
submatrices we identify.
So how would we apply the divide and
conquer paradigm to matrices?
So we're given two n x n matrices,
and we have to somehow identify
smaller pairs of square matrices
that we can multiply recursively.
So the idea I think is fairly natural.
So we start with a big n by n matrix x,
right, so there's n rows and n columns.
And we have to somehow divide
it into smaller pieces.
Now the first thing you might think about
is you put it into it's left half and
it's right half analogous
to what we've been doing.
With arrays, but
then we're going to break X into two
matrices which are no longer square,
which are n over 2 in one dimension, and
have length n in the other dimension.
And we want to recursively call
a subroutine that multiplies
square matrices.
So what seems like the clear thing to do,
is to divide X into quadrants.
Okay, so we have four pieces of X,
each is going to be n over 2 by n over 2
corresponding to the different
quarters of this matrix.
So let's call these different quadrants or
blocks in matrix terminology A, B, C,
and D.
All of these are n over
2 by n over 2 matrices.
As usual for simplicity,
I'm assuming that n is even.
And as usual it doesn't really matter and
we can do the same trick with Y.
So, we'll divide Y into quadrants.
N over 2 by n over 2 matrices,
which we'll call E, F, G, and H.
So one thing that's cool about matrices
is when you split them into blocks and
you multiply them, the blocks just
behave as if they were atomic elements.
So what I mean by that,
is that the product of X and Y can be
expressed in terms of its quadrants.
And each of its four quadrants,
each of its four corners
can be written as a suitable arithmetic
expression of the quadrants of X and Y.
So here's exactly what those formulas are.
They're exactly analogous to when we just
multiplied a pair of 2 by 2 matrices.
So I'm not going to
formally prove this fact.
I'm sure many of you have seen
it before or familiar with it.
And if you haven't,
it's actually quite easy to prove.
It's not obvious since you can't see it
off the top of your head necessarily.
But if you go back to the definition,
it's quite easy to verify.
But indeed when you multiply X and Y,
you can express its quadrants into blocks
in terms of the blocks of X and Y.
So what we just did is completely
analogous to when talking about
integer multiplication, and we wanted
to multiply two integers, x and y, and
we broke them into pairs
of n over 2 digits.
And then we just took the expansion, and
we've observed how that expansion could be
written in terms of products
of n over 2 digit numbers.
It's the same thing going on here,
except with matrices.
So now we're in business as
far as a recursive approach.
We want to multiply x and y.
They're n by n matrices.
We recognize, we going to
express that product, x times y.
In terms of the products of n
over 2 by n over 2 matrices.
Things were able to multiply recursively,
plus additions.
And additions, it's clearly easy to
multiply two different matrices with,
say, n squared entries each.
It's going to be linear
in the number of entries.
So it's going to be n squared time
to add two matrices that are n by n.
So this immediately leads us to
our first recursive algorithm.
To describe it,
let me quickly rewrite that expression
we just saw on the previous slide.
And now our first recursive algorithm
is simply to evaluate all of these
expressions in the obvious way.
So specifically in step one,
we recursively compute all
of the necessary products.
And observe that there are eight
products that we have to compute.
Eight products with n over
2 by n over 2 matrices.
There are four entries in
this expansion of x times y.
Each of the blocks is
the sum of two products and
none of the products reoccurred.
They're all distinct.
So naively, if you want to evaluate this,
we have to do eight different products
of n over 2 by n over 2 matrices.
Once those recursive calls complete,
then all we do is do
the necessary four additions.
As we discussed, so
that takes time proportional to
the number of entries in the matrix.
So this is going to take a quadratic
time overall, quadratic in n.
Linear in the number of entries.
Now the question you should be asking is,
is this a good algorithm?
Was this good for anything?
This recursive approach.
Splitting x and y into these blocks.
Expanding the product in terms
of these blocks then recursively
computing each of the blocks.
And I want to say it's
totally not obvious.
It is not clear what the running
time of this recursive algorithm is.
I'm going to go ahead and give you
a spoiler which is going to follow from
the master method that we'll
talk about in the next lecture.
But it turns out,
with this kind of recursive algorithm
where you do eight recursive calls.
Each on a problem with dimension half
as much as what you started with, and
then do quadratic time outside,
the running time is going to be cubic.
So exactly the same as with the
straightforward iterative algorithm that
follows from the definition.
That was cubic, it turns out,
and that was clearly cubic.
This one, although it's not obvious,
is cubic as well.
So no better, no worse than
the straightforward iterative algorithm.
So in case you're feeling disappointed
that we went through all this work in this
sort of seemingly clever divide and
conquer approach for matrix multiplication
and came out at the end no better
than the iterative algorithm.
Well, there's really no reason to despair.
because remember back in
integer multiplication,
we had a straightforward
recursive algorithm.
Where we have to do four recursive calls.
Products of n over 2 digit numbers.
But then we had Gauss' trick, which said
if we only did more clever products and
more clever additions and subtractions,
then we can get away with
only three recursive calls.
And we'll see later if that is indeed a
significant savings in the time we did for
integer multiplication.
And we've done nothing analogously
clever to Gauss' trick for
this matrix multiplication problem.
All we did is the naive expansion,
in terms of submatrices, and
the naive evaluation of
the resulting expressions.
So, the $64,000 question is then,
can we do something clever,
to reduce the number of recursive calls,
from 8 down to something lower?
And that is where
Strassen's Algorithm comes in.
So the high level
Strassen's Algorithm has two steps,
just like the first recursive
algorithm that we discussed.
It recursively computes some
products of smaller matrices and
over to a roughly n over
2 by n over 2 matrices.
But there's only going to
be seven of them.
But they will be much
less straightforward,
they will be much more cleverly chosen
than in the first recursive algorithm.
In step two then is to actually
produce the product of x and y.
Produce each of those
four blocks that we saw.
With suitable additions and
subtractions of these seven products.
And again, these are much less
straightforward than in the first
recursive algorithm.
And so, while the additions and
subtractions involved will be a little bit
more numerous than they were in
the naive recursive algorithm.
It's only going to change the work
in that part of the algorithm by
a constant factor.
So we'll still spend only theta
(n squared) work adding and
subtracting things, and
we get a huge win in decreasing the number
of recursive calls from 8 to 7.
Now just in case you have the intuition
that shaving off one of eight
recursive calls should only decrease
the running time of an algorithm
by one-eighth by 12.5%.
In fact it has a tremendously
more amplified effect.
Because we do one less recursive
call over and over and
over again as we keep
recursing in the algorithm.
So it makes a fundamental difference in
the eventual running time of the algorithm
as we'll explore in detail
in the next set of lectures
when we discuss the master method.
So again a bit of a spoiler alert.
What you're going to see in the next
set of lectures that indeed
Strassen's Algorithm does beat cubic time.
It's better than n cubed time.
You'll have to watch the next set of
lectures if you want to know just what
the running time is.
But I'm going to tell you now that savings
of the eighth recursive call is what
changes the algorithm
from cubic to subcubic.
Now, 1969 was, obviously,
quite a bit before my time.
But by all accounts, from people I've
talked to who were around then and from
what the books say, Strassen's Algorithm
totally blew people's minds at the time.
Everybody was just assuming that
there's no way you could do better than
the iterative algorithm,
the cubic algorithm.
It just seemed that matrix multiplication
intuitively fundamentally required
all of the calculations that
are spelled out in the definition.
So Strassen's Algorithm is
an early glimpse of the magic and
of the power of clever algorithm design.
But if you really have
a serious ingenuity, even for
super fundamental problems,
you can come up with fundamental savings
over the more straightforward solution.
Solutions.
So
those are the main points I wanted
to talk about Strassen's algorithm.
How you can beat cubic time by saving
a recursive call with suitably chosen
clever products and
clever additions and subtractions.
Maybe a few of you are wondering what
are these cleverly chosen products,
can you really do this?
And I don't blame you.
There's no reason to believe me just
because I sort of spelled out this high
level idea.
It's not obvious this should work.
You might want to actually
see the products.
So for those of you like that,
this last slide is for you.
So here is Strassen's Algorithm
in it's somewhat gory detail.
So let me tell you what the seven
products are that we're going to form.
I'm going to label them P1 through P7 and
they're
all going to be defined in terms of
the blocks of the input matrices x and y.
So let me just remind you that we
think of x in terms of its blocks A,
B, C, D and we think of y in
terms its blocks E, F, G, H.
And remember a through h are all n
over 2 by n over 2 sub-matrices.
So here are the seven
products P1 though P7.
P1 = A(F-H),
P2 = (A+B)H,
P3 = (C+D)E.
P4 = D(G-E).
P5 = (A+D)(E+H).
P6 = (B-D)(G+H) and
finally P7 = (A-C)(E+F).
So I hope you'll agree that these
are indeed only seven products.
And we could compute these
with seven recursive calls.
So we've pre-processed with a little
bit of additions and subtractions.
We have to compute F minus H,
A plus B, C plus D, and so on.
We compute all these new
matrices from the blocks.
And then we can recursively,
with seven recursive calls.
Do the seven products that operate
on n over 2 by n over 2 matrices.
Now the question is why is this useful,
why on earth would we want to know
the values of these seven products.
So the amazing other part of the algorithm
is that from just these seven
products we can using only addition and
subtraction recover all four
of the blocks of x times y.
So x times y you recall we
solved it in terms of blocks.
So we previously computed this to be
AE+BG in the upper left corner and
similarly expressions for the upper right,
lower left or lower right blocks.
So this we already know.
So the content of the claim is
that these four blocks also arise
from the seven products
in the following way.
So the claim here is that these
two different expressions for
x times y are exactly the same, and
they're the same block by block.
So in the other words, what the claim
is that this crazy expression
P5+P4-P2+P6 where those
are four of the products that
we have listed above,
that is precisely AE+BG.
Similarly we're claiming
the P1+P2 as exactly
AF+BH that's actually easy
to see P3+P4 is CE+DG.
That's also easy to see.
And then the other complicated
one is the P1+P5-P3-P7 is exactly
the same as CF+DH, so
all four of those hold.
So, let me, just so you believe me because
I don't know why you'd believe me unless
I showed you some this derivation.
Let's just look at the proof of one of
the cases of the upper left corner.
So that is let's just expand out
this crazy expression, P5+P4-P2+P6.
What do we get?
Well, from P5 we get, AE+AH+DE+DH,
then we add P4, so
that's going to give us,
+DG-DE, then we subtract P2,
so that gives us a -AH-BH,
and then we add in P6, so
that gives us a BG+BH-DG-DH.
Okay so what happens next,
well now we look for
cancellations, so
we cancel the AH's we cancel the DE's,
we cancel the DH's, we cancel the DG's,
we cancel the BH's and
holy cow, what do we get?
We get AE+BG, that is we get exactly
what we were supposed to in
the upper left block of x times y.
So we just actually verified that this
equation holds for the upper left block.
It's quite easy to see that it holds for
the upper right and lower left blocks.
And then a comparable calculation verifies
it for the lower right blocks of the two.
So summarizing, because this claim holds,
because actually we can recover the four
blocks of x times y from
these seven products.
Strassen's algorithm works
in the following way.
You compute the seven products P1
through P7 using seven recursive calls.
Then you just compute the four blocks
using some extra additions and
subtractions as shown in the claim.
So it's seven recursive calls on
n over 2 by n over 2 matrices.
Plus n squared work due to
the necessary additions and as you'll
see in the master method lecture that is
actually sufficient for subcubic time.
Now, I sympathize with you if
you have the following question,
which is how on earth did
Strassen come up with this.
And indeed this sort of illustrates,
the difference between checking somebody's
proof and coming up with a proof.
Given that I told you
the magical seven products and
how you from them you can recover
the four desired blocks of x times y.
It's really just mechanical
to see that it works.
It's a totally different story of how
do you come up with P1 through P7 in
the first place.
So how did Strassen come up with them?
Honestly, your guess is as good as mine.